EVA-1747 — Implement support for repeat expansion variants (#3)
EBIvariation/vep-mapping-pipeline: repeat_expansion_variants/README.md

# Repeat expansion variants pipeline for ClinVar data

## 1. Introduction

> This pipeline is a companion to the main [functional consequence & gene mapping pipeline](../vep_mapping_pipeline) and is intended to be used in conjunction with it. The main pipeline uses Ensembl's Variant Effect Predictor to assign functional consequences to variants. The problem with VEP is that it does not support _repeat expansion variants._ They are a special subclass of duplication variants which cause a small repeat unit to increase in number. As a result of this limitation, the main pipeline cannot process these variants and ignores them. This submodule was created to address this problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This pipeline is a companion to the main [functional consequence & gene mapping pipeline](../vep_mapping_pipeline) and is intended to be used in conjunction with it. The main pipeline uses Ensembl's Variant Effect Predictor (VEP) to assign functional consequences to variants. The problem with VEP is that it does not support _repeat expansion variants._ They are a special class of duplication variants which represent uncertain number of repeats of a small set of nucleotides (see [Table 1 in this abstract](https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113042) for examples). As a result of this limitation, the main pipeline cannot process these variants and ignores them. This sub-module was created to address this problem.
```
I have made the above suggestion based on reading [this](https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113042) abstract. But feel free to accept/reject as you see fit.

## 2. Running the pipeline
The pipeline has one input file and two output files.

### Input file
The input file is ClinVar's [TSV summary file](https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/clinvar/tab_delimited/variant_summary.txt.gz).

### Consequences table

> The first output file, in TSV format, it the consequences table. It uses the same six-column format as the main pipeline. Example (tabs are replaced with spaces for readability):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first output file, in TSV format, is the consequences table. It uses the same six-column format as the main pipeline. Example (tabs are replaced with spaces for readability):
```

As the first preprocessing step, we split each record by **RCVaccession** and **GeneSymbol** columns. This means that, in the example above, a single record becomes six, one per every combination of ClinVar record and gene.

Next, we remove duplicates in the resulting table. They can occur because some (Name, RCVaccession, GeneSymbol) tuples appeared twice in the original table, with coordinates for GRCh37 and GRCh38. Since the genomic coordinates are not used by this pipeline, we simply remove the duplicates.

### Step 2. Parse variant identifiers
The **Name** column contains a variant description which can be in three possible formats:
1. HGVS-like variant description in coding or genomic coordinates, e. g. `NM_000044.4(AR):c.172_174CAG(10_36) (p.Gln69_Gln80del)`.
2. HGVS-like variant description in protein coordinates, e. g. `NP_003915.2:p.Ala260(5_9)`.
3. Human-readable, however standardised, description, e. g. `ATN1, (CAG)n REPEAT EXPANSION`.

There are also three properties which we would like to extract:
1. Lengh of the repeat unit, determined directly from the sequence. In examples 1 and 3 it would be len(CAG) = 3.

> 2. Length of the repeat unit, determined indirectly from the coordinate span of the variant. In example 1, it would be 174 – 172 + 1 = 3.

Reviewer 3: I was a bit confused in this second point, comparing it to the table below. I assume that the information you really want is just the length of the repeat unit and the transcript, and the coordinate span is just a way to get to the repeat unit length; but having "1. Lengh of the repeat unit [...] 2.Lengh of the repeat unit" was odd at first.

Author: You're right, after re-reading this I can see how it was very confusing. I changed this to list just the two properties, and the different ways to extract the first one (length of repeat unit). Fixed in https://github.com/EBIvariation/vep-mapping-pipeline/pull/3/commits/05e549bf9b7cd8c15d7f8681881ee1b7b43030f4

At this step, we extract all properties which we can from the variant identifiers and save them to separate dataframe columns.

### Step 3. Annotate Ensembl gene information
There are three columns which can be used to deduce gene information: HGNC_ID & GeneSymbol (from ClinVar data), and TranscriptID (parsed from the variant identifier). Because neither of them is present for **all** records, we successively try to annotate Ensembl gene ID based on each of those columns in that order. For example, if Ensembl gene ID for a particular record was determined based on HGNC_ID, then GeneSymbol and TranscriptID will not be tried for that column. Ensembl gene information is being annotated using their [BioMart service](https://www.ensembl.org/biomart/).

In some cases, a mapping from HGNC ID produces multiple Ensembl hits. For example, HGNC:10560 is being resolved to ENSG00000285258 and ENSG00000163635. In this case, a record is further split into two, each mapping into their corresponding Ensembl gene IDs.

### Step 4. Determine repeat type and record completeness
There are two repeat types detected by this pipeline:

> * `trinucleotide_repeat_expansion`, corresponding to SO term http://sequenceontology.org/browser/current_release/term/SO:0002165. This is chosen when the repeat length appears to be either 3, **or a multiple or 3.** For example:

Reviewer: > or a **multiple** of 3

Is this additional OR criteria defined in relevant literature? I can't see it in the said link but if there is some other documentation which cites this I would suggest linking to that too....

Author: This is actually something which I want to discuss with Open Targets directors. When I will be sending an update about this pipeline, I will include this specific question about whether we should include strictly trinucleotide repeats, or those which are a multiple of 3.

  + `NM_001081563.1:c.*224_*226[(50-?)]` — repeat unit spans 3 nucleotides based on coordinates
  + `NM_001081560.2(DMPK):c.*224_*226CTG(51_?)` — spans 3 nucleotides based on coordinates, and the sequence length is also 3
  + `NM_000100.3(CSTB):c.-210CCCCGCCCCGCG(2_3)` — sequence length is 12, a multiple of 3
* `short_tandem_repeat_expansion`, corresponding to SO term http://sequenceontology.org/browser/current_release/term/SO:0002161. This is chosen in the cases when the repeat length can be _determined_ by at least one method, but its unit length is not a multiple of 3.

Similarly to the previous step, repeat type can be determined using several fields. The determination algorithm is as follows:

> * If the variant identifier is type 3, “Protein HGVS”: assume repeat is a `trinucleotide_repeat_expansion`, since it affects entire amino acids

Reviewer: Could you please link to relevant literature that evidences/supports this assumption?

Author: There isn't so much literature supporting this, as just the fact that each amino acid is encoded by a triplet of nucleotides. So if we see an insertion of N amino acids, it invariably means an insertion of 3×N nucleotides took place, hence this will be a trinucleotide repeat expansion. I've added this to the description for clarify. Fixed in https://github.com/EBIvariation/vep-mapping-pipeline/pull/3/commits/74339dfa546dfce2a3fa5b355f02f73981895b0b
